Step 0: Getting Started
Access and fork the starter code.
In your terminal, run npm install to install dependencies, then npm run dev to run the web app.
Take a look at the starter code so you understand its structure and functionality.
AI opportunity

Use AI to understand provided code → Codebase navigation
Step 1: Setup a database on Render
Before proceeding, you'll need to suspend any active Postgres databases. Render's free tier only allows for one active database at a time.
Want to confirm the suspension procedure? Check it out here ⤵️
You'll need to create a database on Render for your web app to connect to.

Choose +New in the header, and select Postgres from the dropdown menu.
Select a name for your database, choose the free tier, and click Create Database.
This will create an empty PostgreSQL database.

Step 2: Connect to the database
Now that we have a database on Render, let's connect our web app to it.


In the server directory, create a folder called config.


Inside the config folder, create a file called database.js.


Add the following code to your database.js file:

import pg from 'pg'

const config = {
    user: process.env.PGUSER,
    password: process.env.PGPASSWORD,
    host: process.env.PGHOST,
    port: process.env.PGPORT,
    database: process.env.PGDATABASE,
    ssl: {
      rejectUnauthorized: false
    }
}

export const pool = new pg.Pool(config)

In the server directory, create a new file called .env and add the following variables:

PGUSER=""
PGPASSWORD=""
PGHOST=""
PGPORT=
PGDATABASE=""

In Render, click on the database you created. Insert the values from the Connections subheader into your .env file as shown below:

PGDATABASE="{Database}"
PGHOST="{Hostname}.oregon-postgres.render.com"
PGPASSWORD="{Password}"
PGPORT={Port}
PGUSER="{Username}"

In your config directory, create a new file called reset.js to create tables to store the custom items and any other data your web app will need to work with.

AI opportunity

Use AI to understand why your code isn't working → Debugging Database Connections
Step 3: Setup controllers
So now that our web app can talk to the database, but next it needs the ability to get, create, edit, and delete items from your custom items table.

In the server directory, create a folder called controllers.
In the controllers folder, create a file for your custom items table.
In this file, import the pool from your database.js file.
Add your functions to get, create, edit, and delete cars from your custom items table.
Export the functions you create.
Step 4: Define routes
Great! Now our web app can connect to the database and access the custom items table. Next, let's set up routes that call these functions when accessed.


In the server directory, create a folder called routes.


In the routes folder, create files for the routes you need to set up.


Add the following code to each routes file:

import express from 'express'
// import controller for custom items


const router = express.Router()

// define routes to get, create, edit, and delete items


export default Router

Import your controllers for your custom items.


Define routes to get, create, edit, and delete items that use the appropriate function from your controller.

Depending on how you decide to structure the options, you might need to repeat Steps 3 and 4 for additional tables. For example, you might want to create a table for exterior color options and the ability to get all color options and a specific color option by its id.

AI opportunity

Use AI to brainstorm ideas for your code → Structuring API Routes
Step 5: Update the server
We have our database, tables, controller, and routes. The last thing we need to do on the backend is tell the server that these routes exist.


In the server.js file in the server directory, import your router from your routes files.


Specify the API path for the server to use for the routers, for example:

app.use('/api', router)
Step 6: Connect the frontend to the API
Phew! Backend is all set up ✅ Let's build the frontend to get the data from the database so the user can get, add, update, and delete items.

In the client directory, create a folder called services in the src folder.
In the services folder, create a file for your API calls, such as CarsAPI.jsx.
In this file, define functions to get, add, update, and delete cars by calling the API. For example, getAllCars, getCar, createCar, etc.
Export the functions.
If you have additional tables for options and features, create files for the API calls to these tables.

Step 7: Complete the frontend
The starter code has pages for creating items, viewing an item's details, editing an item, and viewing all items, but they're currently blank! Build these pages to pull the data needed from the database and implement the features.

Complete the pages to allow the user to create items, edit items, view the items that have been created, and view the details for a single item.
Import the files from the services folder as needed in these pages.
Step 8: Calculating price or checking feature combinations
As you work on the frontend, you should create a separate utilities file with functions for calculating the price of the item or checking feature combinations.

Create a folder called utilities in the client\src folder.
Create files for these functions. For example, a validation file that contains functions for checking feature combinations or a calcprice file that contains functions for getting option prices and calculating the total price of the item.
💡 Hints
Help! I don't know where to start!

Look at this week's lab for examples on how to implement similar applications. What code will be similar? What do you need to change?
I'm stuck on something!

Don't just skip the Resources section.
Review the AI debugging tips in the box below!
Still need a little extra help getting started or running into an error? Try posting in the Class Slack Channel.
AI opportunity

Use AI to understand why your code isn't working
📣 Submission Guidelines: For more details on submission instructions, follow the guidelines on the Submitting Coursework page.
Make sure you are adding and committing files in git as you complete features and milestones.
Be sure to include a README containing a GIF walkthrough of your project.
Use this README TEMPLATE.
It is important that you follow the same layout as the README template so that we can easily access your work.
Be sure to check off each feature that is implemented in your submission by changing [ ] to [x]. We won't be able to assign points if a feature is unchecked.
Note: We highly encourage you submit your project in any state (even if it is not done) by Wednesday, October 22nd at 2:59AM EDT. You can continue to work on your project with our 48-hour extension* in which your project will be graded once more once the extension deadline has passed (see "Coursework Submissions" in Syllabus for details). Don't forget to resubmit through the course portal with your updated GIF recording!